







           THE PROPHET OF THE GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS

                  BY CHARLES EGBERT CRADDOCK


                        A NEW EDITION

    LONDON
    CHATTO & WINDUS
    1901




I.


Always enwrapped in the illusory mists, always touching the evasive
clouds, the peaks of the Great Smoky Mountains are like some barren
ideal, that has bartered for the vague isolations of a higher atmosphere
the material values of the warm world below. Upon those mighty and
majestic domes no tree strikes root, no hearth is alight; humanity is an
alien thing, and utility set at naught. Below, dense forests cover the
massive, precipitous slopes of the range, and in the midst of the
wilderness a clearing shows, here and there, and the roof of a humble
log-cabin; in the valley, far, far lower still, a red spark at dusk may
suggest a home, nestling in the cove. Grain grows apace in these scanty
clearings, for the soil in certain favoured spots is mellow; and the
weeds grow, too, and in a wet season the ploughs are fain to be active.
They are of the bull-tongue variety, and are sometimes drawn by oxen. As
often as otherwise they are followed by women.

In the gracious June mornings, when winds are astir and wings are awhirl
in the wide spaces of the sunlit air, the work seemed no hardship to
Dorinda Cayce--least of all one day when another plough ran parallel to
the furrows of her own, and a loud, drawling, intermittent conversation
became practicable. She paused often, and looked idly about her:
sometimes at the distant mountains, blue and misty, against the
indefinite horizon; sometimes down at the cool, dense shadows of the
wooded valley, so far below the precipice, to which the steep clearing
shelved; sometimes at the little log-cabin on the slope above, sheltered
by a beetling crag and shadowed by the pines; sometimes still higher at
the great 'bald' of the mountain, and its mingled phantasmagoria of
shifting clouds and flickering sheen and glimmering peak.

'He 'lowed ter me,' she said suddenly, 'ez he hev been gin ter view
strange sights a many a time in them fogs, an' sech.'

The eyes lifted to the shivering vapours might never have reflected
aught but a tropical sunshine, so warm, so bright, so languorously calm
were they. She turned them presently upon a young man, who was
ploughing with a horse close by, and who also came to a meditative halt
in the turn-row. He too was of intermittent conversational tendencies,
and between them it might be marvelled that so many furrows were already
run. He wore a wide-brimmed brown wool hat, set far back upon his head;
a mass of straight yellow hair hung down to the collar of his brown
jeans coat. His brown eyes were slow and contemplative. The corn was
knee-high, and hid the great boots drawn over his trousers. As he moved
there sounded the unexpected jingle of spurs. He looked, with the
stolid, lack-lustre expression of the mountaineer, at the girl, who
continued, as she leaned lightly on the plough-handles:

'I 'lowed ter him ez mebbe he hed drempt them visions. I knows I hev
thunk some toler'ble cur'ous thoughts myself, ef I war tired an'
sleepin' hard. But he said he reckoned I hed drempt no sech dreams ez
his'n. I can't holp sorrowin' fur him some. He 'lowed ez Satan hev
hunted him like a pa'tridge on the mounting.'

The young man's eyes dropped with sudden significance upon his
plough-handles. A pair of pistols in their leather cases swung
incongruously there. They gave a caustic suggestion of human adversaries
as fierce as the moral pursuit of the Principle of Evil, and the girl's
face fell. In absence of mind she recommenced her work.

'Waal,' she gently drawled, as the old ox languidly started down the
row, ''pears like ter me ez it ain't goin' ter be no differ, nohow: it
won't hender ye none.'

Her face was grave, but there was a smile in her eyes, which had the
lustre and depth of a sapphire, and a lambent glow like the heart of a
blue flame. They were fringed by long, black lashes, and her hair was
black also. Her pink calico sun-bonnet, flaring toward the front, showed
it lying in moist tendrils on her brow, and cast an unwonted roseate
tint upon the clear, healthful pallor of her complexion. She wore a dark
blue homespun dress, and, despite her coarse garb and uncouth occupation
and the gaunt old ox, there was something impressive in her simple
beauty, her youth, and her elastic vigour. As she drove the ploughshare
into the mould she might have seemed the type of a young
civilization--so fine a thing in itself, so roughly accoutred.

When she came down the slope again, facing him, the pink curtain of her
bonnet waving about her shoulders, her blue skirts fluttering among the
blades of corn, a winged shadow sweeping along as if attendant upon her,
while a dove flew high above to its nest in the pines, he raised his
hand with an imperative gesture, and she paused obediently. He had
flushed deeply; the smouldering fire in his eyes was kindling. He leaned
across the few rows of corn that stood between them.

'I hev a word ter ax right now. Who air under conviction hyar?' he
demanded.

She seemed a trifle startled. Her grasp shifted uncertainly on the
plough-handles, and the old ox, accustomed to rest only at the turn-row,
mistook her intention, and started off. She stopped him with some
difficulty, and then, 'Convicted of sin?' she asked, in a voice that
showed her appreciation of the solemnity of the subject.

'I hev said it,' the young man declared, with a half-suppressed
irritation which confused her.

She remained silent.

'Mebbe it air yer granny,' he suggested, with a sneer.

She recoiled, with palpable surprise. 'Granny made her peace fifty year
ago,' she declared, with pride in this anciently acquired grace--'fifty
year an' better.'

'The boys air convicted, then? he asked, still leaning over the corn and
still sneering.

'The boys hev got thar religion, too,' she faltered, looking at him with
wide eyes, brilliant with astonishment, and yet a trifle dismayed.
Suddenly, she threw herself into her wonted confiding attitude, leaning
upon her plough-handles, and with an appealing glance began an
extenuation of her spiritual poverty: ''Pears like ez I hev never hed a
call ter tell you-uns afore ez I hev hed no time yit ter git my
religion. Granny bein' old, an' the boys at the still, I hev hed ter
spin, an' weave, an' cook, an' sew, an' plough some--the boys bein'
mos'ly at the still. An' then, thar be Mirandy Jane, my brother Ab's
darter, ez I hev hed ter l'arn how ter cook vittles. When I went down
yander ter my aunt Jerushy's house in Tuckaleechee Cove, ter holp her
some with weavin', I war plumb cur'ous ter know how Mirandy Jane would
make out whilst I war gone. They 'lowed ez she hed cooked the vittles
toler'ble, but ef she had washed a skillet or a platter in them three
days _I_ couldn't find it.'

Her tone was stern; all the outraged housekeeper was astir within her.

He said nothing, and she presently continued discursively, still leaning
on the plough-handles:

'I never stayed away but them three days. I warn't sati'fied in my mind,
nohow, whilst I bided down thar in Tuckaleechee Cove. I hankered
cornsider'ble arter the baby. He air three year old now, an' I hev
keered fur him ever sence his mother died--my brother Ab's wife, ye
know--two year ago an' better. They hed fedded him toler'ble whilst I
war away, an' I fund him fat ez common. But they hed crost him
somehows, an' he war ailin' in his temper when I got home, an' hed ter
hev cornsider'ble coddlin'.'

She paused before the rising anger in his eyes.

'Why air Mirandy Jane called ter l'arn how ter cook vittles?' he
demanded, irrelevantly, it might have seemed.

She looked at him in deprecating surprise. Yet she turned at bay.

'I hev never hearn ez ye war convicted yerself, Rick Tyler!' she said
tartly. 'Ye war never so much ez seen a-scoutin' round the mourner's
bench. Ef I hev got no religion, ye hev got none, nuther.'

'Ye air minded ter git married, D'rindy Cayce,' he said severely,
solving his own problem, 'an' that's why Mirandy Jane hev got ter be
l'arned ter take yer place at home.'

He produced this as if it were an accusation.

She drew back, indignant and affronted, and with a rigid air of offended
propriety.

'I hev no call ter spen' words 'bout sech ez that with a free-spoken man
like you-uns,' she staidly asseverated; and then she was about to move
on.

Accepting her view of the gross unseemliness of his mention of the
subject, the young fellow's anger gave way to contrition.

'Waal, D'rindy,' he said, in an eager, apologetic tone,' I hev seen that
critter, that thar preacher, a-hangin' round you-uns's house a powerful
deal lately, whilst I hev been obleeged ter hide out in the woods. An'
bein' ez nobody thar owns up ter needin' religion but ye, I reckoned he
war a-tryin' ter git ye ter take him an' grace tergether. That man hev
got his mouth stuffed chock-full o' words--more 'n enny other man I ever
see,' he added, with an expression of deep disgust.

Dorinda might be thought to abuse her opportunities.

'He ain't studyin' 'bout'n me, no more 'n I be 'bout'n him,' she said,
with scant relish for the spectacle of Rick Tyler's jealousy. 'Pa'son
Kelsey jes' stops thar ter the house ter rest his bones awhile, arter he
comes down off'n the bald, whar he goes ter pray.'

'In the name o' reason,' exclaimed the young fellow petulantly, 'why
can't he pray somewhar else? A man ez hev got ter h'ist hisself on the
bald of a mounting ten mile high--except what's lackin'--ter git a
purchase on prayer hain't got no religion wuth talkin' 'bout. Sinner ez
I am, I kin pray in the valley--way down yander in Tuckaleechee Cove--ez
peart ez on enny bald in the Big Smoky. That critter air a powerful
aggervatin' contrivance.'

Her eyes still shone upon him.

''Pears like ter me ez it air no differ, nohow,' she said, with her
consolatory cadence. As she again started down the row, she added,
glancing over her shoulder and relenting even to explanation, ''Twar
granny's word ez Mirandy Jane hed ter be l'arned ter cook an' sech. She
air risin' thirteen now, an' air toler'ble bouncin' an' spry, an'
oughter be some use, ef ever. An' _she_ mought marry when she gits
fairly grown, an',' pausing in the turn-row for argument, and looking
with earnest eyes at him, as he still stood in the midst of the waving
corn, idly holding his plough-handles, where the pistols swung, 'ef she
did marry, 'pears like ter me ez she would be mightily faulted ef she
couldn't cook tasty.'

There was no reasonable doubt of this proposition, but it failed to
convince, and in miserable cogitation he completed another furrow, and
met her at the turn-row.

'I s'pose ez Pa'son Kelsey an' yer granny air powerful sociable an'
frien'ly,' he hazarded, as they stood together.

'I dunno ez them two air partic'lar frien'ly. Pa'son Kelsey air in
nowise a sociable critter,' said Dorinda, with a discriminating air. 'He
ain't like Brother Jake Tobin--though it 'pears like ter me ez his gift
in prayer air manifested more survigrus, ef ennything.' She submitted
this diffidently. Having no religion, she felt incompetent to judge of
such matters. ''Pears like ter me ez Pa'son Kelsey air more like 'Lijah
an' 'Lisha, an' them men, what he talks about cornsider'ble, an' goes
out ter meet on the bald.'

'He don't meet them men on the bald; they air dead,' said Rick Tyler
abruptly.

She looked at him in shocked surprise.

'That's jes' his addling way o' talkin',' continued the young fellow.
'He don't mean fur true more 'n haffen what he say. He 'lows ez he meets
the sperits o' them men on the bald.'

Once more she lifted her bright eyes to the shivering vapours--vague,
mysterious, veiling in solemn silence the barren, awful heights.

An extreme gravity had fallen upon her face.

'Did they live in thar lifetime up hyar in the Big Smoky, or in the
valley kentry?' she asked, in a lowered voice.

'I ain't sure 'bout'n that,' he replied indifferently.

''Crost the line in the old North State?' she hazarded, exhausting her
knowledge of the habitable globe.

'I hearn him read 'bout'n it wunst, but I furgits now.'

Still her reverent, beautiful eyes, full of the dreamy sunshine, were
lifted to the peak. 'It must hev been in the Big Smoky Mountings they
lived,' she said, with eager credulity, 'fur he tole me ez the word an'
the prophets holped him when Satan kem a-huntin' of him like a pa'tridge
on the mounting.'

The young fellow turned away, with a gesture of angry impatience.

'Ef he hed ever hed the State o' Tennessee a-huntin' of him he wouldn't
be so feared o' Satan. Ef thar war a warrant fur _him_ in the sher'ffs
pocket, an' the gran' jury's true bill fur murder lyin' agin _him_
yander at Shaftesville, an' the gov'nor's reward, two hunderd dollars
blood-money, on _him_, he wouldn't be a-humpin' his bones round hyar so
peart, a-shakin' in his shoes fur the fear o' Satan.' He laughed--a
caustic, jeering laugh. 'Satan's mighty active, considerin' his age, but
I'd be willin' ter pit the State o' Tennessee agin him when it kem ter
huntin' of folks like a pa'tridge.'

The sunshine in the girl's eyes was clouded. They had filled with tears.
Still leaning on the plough-handles, she looked at him, with suddenly
crimson cheeks and quivering lips. 'I dunno how the State o' Tennessee
kin git its own cornsent ter be so mean an' wicked ez it air,' she said,
his helpless little partizan.

Despite their futility, her words comforted him. 'An' I hev done
nuthin', nohow!' he cried out, in shrill self-justification. 'I could no
more hender 'Bednego Tynes from shootin' Joel Byers down in his own
door 'n nuthin' in this worl'. I never even knowed they hed a grudge.
'Bednego Tynes, he tole me ez he owed Joel a debt, an' war goin' ter see
him 'bout'n it, an' wanted somebody along ter hear his word an' see
justice done 'twixt 'em. Thar air fower Byers boys, an' I reckon he war
feared they would all jump on him at wunst, an' he wanted me ter holp
him ef they did. An' I went along like a fool sheep, thinkin' 'bout
nuthin'. An' when we got way down yander in Eskaqua Cove, whar Joel
Byers's house air, he gin a hello at the fence, an' Joel kem ter the
door. An' 'Bednego whipped up his rifle suddint an' shot him through the
head, ez nip an' percise! An' thar stood Joel's wife, seein' it all. An'
'Bednego run off, nimble, I tell ye, an' I war so flustrated I run, too.
Somebody cotched 'Bednego in the old North State the nex' week, an' the
gov'nor hed ter send a requisition arter him. But sence I fund out ez
they 'lowed I war aidin' an' abettin' 'Bednego, an' war goin' ter arrest
me 'kase I war thar at the killin', they hev hed powerful little chance
o' tryin' me in the court. An' whilst the gov'nor hed his hand in, he
offered a reward fur sech a lawless man ez I be.'

He broke off, visibly struggling for composure; then he recommenced in
increasing indignation: 'An' these hyar frien's o' mine in the Big
Smoky, I'll be bound they hanker powerful arter them two hunderd
dollars blood-money. I know ez I'd hev been tuk afore this, ef it warn't
fur them consarns thar.' He nodded frowningly at the pistols. 'Them's
the only frien's I hev got.'

The girl's voice trembled. ''Pears like ye mought count me in,' she said
reproachfully.

'Naw,' he retorted sternly; 'ye go round hyar sorrowin' fur a man ez hev
got nuthin' ter be afeared of but the devil.'

She made no reply, and her meekness mollified him.

'D'rindy,' he said, in an altered tone, and with the pathos of a keen
despair, 'I hed fixed it in my mind a good while ago, when I could hev
hed a house, an' lived like folks, stidd'er like a wolf in the woods,
ter ax ye ter marry me; but I war hendered by gittin' skeered 'bout'n
yer bein' all in favour o' Amos Jeemes, ez kem up ter see ye from
Eskaqua Cove, an' I didn't want ter git turned off. Mebbe ef I hed axed
ye then I wouldn't hev tuk ter goin' along o' Abednego Tynes an' sech,
an' the killin' o' Joel wouldn't hev happened like it done. Would
ye--would ye hev married me then?'

Her eyes flashed. 'Ye air fairly sodden with foolishness, Rick!' she
exclaimed angrily. 'Air you-uns thinkin ez I'll 'low ez I would hev
married a man four months ago ez never axed me ter marry, nohow?' Then,
with an appreciation of the delicacy of the position and a conservation
of mutual pride, she added, 'An' I won't say nuther ez I _wouldn't_
marry a man ez hev never axed me ter marry, nohow.'

Somehow, the contrariety of the proprieties, as she translated them,
bewildered and baffled him. Even had he been looking at her he might
hardly have interpreted, with his blunt perceptions, the dewy
wistfulness of the eyes which she bent upon him. The word might promise
nothing now. Still she would have valued it. He did not speak it. His
eyes were fixed on Chilhowee Mountain, rising up, massive and splendid,
against the west. The shadows of the clouds flecked the pure and perfect
blue of the sunny slopes with a dusky mottling of purple. The denser
shade in the valley had shifted, and one might know by this how the day
wore on. The dew had dried from the long, keen blades of the Indian
corn; the grasshoppers droned among them. A lizard basked on a flat
white stone hard by. The old ox dozed in the turn-row.

Suddenly Rick Tyler lifted his hand, with an intent gesture and a
dilated eye. There came from far below, on the mountain road, the sound
of a horse's hoof striking on a stone, again, and yet again. A faint
metallic jingle--the air was so still now--suggested spurs. The girl's
hand trembled violently as she stepped swiftly to his horse and took
off the plough-gear. He had caught up a saddle that was lying in the
turn-row, and as hastily buckled the girth about the animal.

'Ef that air ennybody a-hankerin' ter see me, don't you-uns be a-denyin'
ez I hev been hyar, D'rindy,' he said, as he put his foot in the
stirrup. 'I reckon they hev fund out by now ez I be in the kentry round
about. But keep 'em hyar ez long ez ye kin, ter gin me a start.'

He mounted his horse, and rode noiselessly away along the newly turned
mould of the furrow.

She stood leaning upon her plough-handles and silently watching him. His
equestrian figure, darkly outlined against the far blue mountains and
the intermediate valley, seemed of heroic size against the landscape,
which was reduced by the distance to the minimum of proportion. The deep
shadows of the woods encompassing the clearing fell upon him presently,
and he, too, was but a shadow in the dusky monochrome of the limited
vista. The dense laurel closed about him, and his mountain fastnesses,
that had befriended him of yore, received him once again.

Then up and down the furrows Dorinda mechanically followed the plough,
her pulses throbbing, every nerve tense, every faculty alert. She winced
when she heard the frequent striking of hoofs upon the rocky slopes of
the road below. She was instantly aware when they were silent, and the
party had stopped to breathe the horses. She began accurately to gauge
their slow progress.

''Tain't airish in nowise ter-day,' she said, glancing about at the
still, noontide landscape; 'an' ef them air valley cattle they mus' git
blowed mightily travellin' up sech steep mountings ez the Big Smoky.'
She checked her self-gratulation. 'Though I ain't wantin' ter gloat on
the beastis' misery, nuther,' she stipulated.

She paused presently at the lower end of the clearing, and looked down
over the precipice, that presented a sheer sandstone cliff on one side,
and on the other a wild confusion of splintered and creviced rocks,
where the wild rose bloomed in the niches and the grape-vine swung. The
beech-trees on the slope below conserved beneath their dense, umbrageous
branches a tender green twilight. Loitering along in a gleaming silver
thread by the roadside was a mountain rill, hardly gurgling even when
with slight and primitive shift it was led into a hollow and mossy log,
that it might aggregate sufficient volume in the dry season to water the
horse of the chance wayfarer.

The first stranger that rode into this shadowy nook took off a large
straw hat and bared his brow to the refreshing coolness. His grizzled
hair stood up in front after the manner denominated 'a roach.' His
temples were deeply sunken, and his strongly marked face was long and
singularly lean. He held it forward, as if he were snuffing the air. He
had a massive and powerful frame, with not an ounce of superfluous
flesh, and he looked like a hound in the midst of the hunting season.

It served to quiet Dorinda's quivering nerves when he leisurely rode his
big grey horse up to the trough, and dropped the rein that the animal
might drink. If he were in pursuit he evidently had no idea how close he
had pressed the fugitive. He was joined there by the other members of
the party, six or eight in number, and presently a stentorian voice
broke upon the air. 'Hello! Hello!' he shouted, hailing the log cabin.

Mirandy Jane, a slim, long-legged, filly-like girl of thirteen, with a
tangled black mane, the forelock hanging over her wild, prominent eyes,
had at that moment appeared on the porch. She paused, and stared at the
strangers with vivacious surprise. Then, taking sudden fright, she fled
precipitately, with as much attendant confusion of pattering footfalls,
flying mane, and excited snorts and gasps as if she were a troop of wild
horses.

'Granny! Granny!' she exclaimed to the old crone in the chimney-corner,
'thar's a man on a big grey critter down at the trough, an' I an't
s'prised none ef he air a raider!'

The hail of the intruders was regarded as a challenge by some fifteen or
twenty hounds that suddenly materialized among the beehives and the
althea bushes, and from behind the ash-hopper and the hen-house and the
rain-barrel. From under the cabin two huge curs came, their activity
impeded by the blocks and chains they drew. These were silent, while the
others yelped vociferously, and climbed over the fence, and dashed down
the road.

The horses pricked up their ears, and the leader of the party awaited
the onslaught with a pistol in his hand.

The old woman, glancing out of the window, observed this demonstration.

'He'll kill one o' our dogs with that thar shootin'-iron o' his'n!' she
exclaimed in trepidation. 'Run, Mirandy Jane, an' tell him _our_ dogs
don't bite.'

The filly-like Mirandy Jane made great speed among the hounds as she
called them off, and remembered only after she had returned to the house
to be afraid of the 'shootin'-iron' herself.

The old woman, who had come out on the porch, stood gazing at the party,
shading her eyes with her hands, and a long-range colloquy ensued.

'Good-mornin', madam,' said the man at the trough.

'Good-mornin', sir,' quavered the old crone on the mountain slope.

'I'm the sher'ff o' the county, madam, an' I'd like ter know ef----'

'Mirandy Jane,' the old woman interrupted, in a wrathful undertone,
''pears like I hev' hed the trouble o' raisin' a idjit in you-uns! Them
ain't raiders, 'n nuthin' like it. Run an' tell the sher'ff we air
dishin' up dinner right now, an' ax him an' his gang ter' light an'
hitch, an' eat it along o' we-uns.'

The prospect was tempting. It was high noon, and the posse had been in
the saddle since dawn. Dorinda, with a beating heart, remarked how short
a consultation resulted in dismounting and hitching the horses; and
then, with their spurs jingling and their pistols belted about them, the
men trooped up to the house.

As they seated themselves around the table, more than one looked back
over his shoulder at the open window, in which was framed, as motionless
as a painted picture, the vast perspective of the endless blue ranges
and the great vaulted sky, not more blue, all with the broad, still,
brilliant noontide upon it.

'Ye ain't scrimped fur a view, Mis' Cayce, an' that's the Lord's truth!'
exclaimed the officer.

'Waal,' said the old woman, as if her attention were called to the fact
for the first time, 'we kin see a power o' kentry from this spot o'
ourn, sure enough; but I dunno ez it gins us enny more chance o' ever
viewin' Canaan.'

'It's a sight o' ground ter hev ter hunt a man over, ez ef he war a
needle in a haystack,' and once more the officer turned and surveyed the
prospect.

The room was overheated by the fire which had cooked the dinner, and the
old woman actively plied her fan of turkey feathers, pausing
occasionally to readjust her cap, which had a flapping frill, and was
surmounted by a pair of gleaming spectacles. A bandana kerchief was
crossed over her breast, and she wore a blue-and-white-checked homespun
dress of the same pattern and style that she had worn here fifty years
ago. Her hands were tremulous and gnarled, and her face was deeply
wrinkled, but her interest in life was as fresh as Mirandy Jane's.

The great frame of the warping-bars on one side of the room was swathed
with a rainbow of variegated yarn, and a spinning-wheel stood near the
door. A few shelves, scrupulously neat, held piggins, a cracked blue
bowl, brown earthenware, and the cooking utensils. There were rude
gun-racks on the walls. These indicated the fact of several men in the
family. It was the universal dinner-hour, yet none of them appeared. The
sheriff reflected that perhaps they had their own sufficient reason to
be shy of strangers, and the horses hitched outside advertised the
presence and number of unaccustomed visitors within. When the usual
appetizer was offered, it took the form of whisky in such quantity that
the conviction was forced upon him that it was come by very handily.
However, he applied himself with great relish to the bacon and
snap-beans, corn dodgers and fried chicken, not knowing that Mirandy
Jane, who was esteemed altogether second-rate, had cooked them, and he
spread honey upon the apple-pie, ate it with his knife, and washed it
down with buttermilk, kept cold as ice in the spring--the mixture being
calculated to surprise a more civilized stomach.

Not even his conscience was roused--the first intimation of a disordered
digestion. He listened to old Mrs. Cayce with no betrayal of divination
when she vaguely but anxiously explained the absence of her son and his
boys in the equivocal phrase, 'Not round about ter-day, bein' gone off,'
and he asked how many miles distant was the Settlement, as if he
understood they had gone thither. He was saying to himself, the brush
whisky warming his heart, that the revenue department paid him nothing
to raid moonshiners, and there was no obligation of his office to sift
any such suspicion which might occur to him while accepting an unguarded
hospitality.

He looked with somewhat appreciative eyes at Dorinda, as she went back
and forth from the table to the pot which hung in the deep chimney-place
above the smouldering coals. She had laid aside her bonnet. Her face was
grave, her eyes were bright and excited; her hair was drawn back, except
for the tendrils about her brow, and coiled, with the aid of a
much-prized 'tuckin'-comb,' at the back of her head in a knot
discriminated as Grecian in civilization. He remarked to her grandmother
that he was a family man himself, and had a daughter as old, he should
say, as Dorinda.

'D'rindy air turned seventeen, now,' said Mrs. Cayce disparagingly. 'It
'pears like ter me ez the young folks nowadays air awk'ard an' back'ard.
I war married when I war sixteen--sixteen scant.'

The girl felt that she was indeed of advanced years, and the sheriff
said that his daughter was not yet sixteen, and he thought it probable
that she weighed more than Dorinda.

He lighted his pipe presently, and tilted his chair back against the
wall.

'Yes 'm,' he said meditatively, gazing out of the window at the great
panorama, 'it's a pretty big spot o' kentry ter hev ter hunt a man over.
Now ef 'twar one o' the town folks we could make out ter overhaul him
somehows; but a mounting boy--why, he's ez free ter the hills ez a fox.
I s'pose ye hain't seen him hyar-abouts?'

'I hain't hearn who it air yit,' the old woman replied, putting her hand
behind her ear.

'It's Rick Tyler; he hails from this deestric'. I won't be 'stonished ef
we ketch him this time. The gov'nor has offered two hunderd dollars
reward fur him, an' I reckon somebody will find it wuth while ter head
him fur us.'

He was talking idly. He had no expectation of developments here. He had
only stopped at the house in the first instance for the question which
he had asked at every habitation along the road. It suddenly occurred to
him as polite to include Dorinda in the conversation.

'Ye hain't seen nor hearn of him, I s'pose, hev ye?' inquired the
sheriff, directly addressing her.

As he turned toward her he marked her expression. His own face changed
suddenly. He rose at once.

'Don't trifle with the law, I warn ye,' he said sternly. 'Ye hev seen
that man.'

Dorinda was standing beside her spinning-wheel, one hand holding the
thread, the other raised to guide the motion. She looked at him pale and
breathless.

'I hev seen him. I ain't onwillin' ter own it. Ye never axed me afore.'

The other members of the party had crowded in from the porch, where they
had been sitting since dinner, smoking their pipes. The officer,
realizing his lapse of vigilance and the loss of his opportunity, was
sharply conscious, too, of their appreciation of his fatuity.

'Whar did ye see him?' he asked.

'I seen him hyar--this mornin'.' There was a stir of excitement in the
group. 'He kem by on his beastis whilst I war a-ploughin', an' we talked
a passel. An' then he tuk Pete's plough, ez war idle in the turn-row,
an' helped along some; he run a few furrows.'

'Which way did he go?' asked the sheriff breathlessly.

'I dunno,' faltered the girl.

'Look-a-hyar!' he thundered, in rising wrath. 'Ye'll find yerself under
lock an' key in the jail at Shaftesville, if ye undertake ter fool with
me. Which way did he go?'

A flush sprang into the girl's excited face. Her eyes flashed.

'Ef ye kin jail me fur tellin' all I know, I can't holp it,' she said,
with spirit. 'I kin tell no more.'

He saw the justice of her position. It did not make the situation
easier for him. Here he had sat eating and drinking and idly talking,
while the fugitive, who had escaped by a hair's-breadth, was counting
miles and miles between himself and his lax pursuer. This would be heard
of in Shaftesville--and he a candidate for re-election! He beheld
already an exchange of significant glances among his posse. Had he asked
that simple question earlier he might now be on his way back to
Shaftesville, his prisoner braceleted with the idle handcuffs that
jingled in his pocket as he moved.

He caught at every illusive vagary that might promise to retrieve his
error. He declared that she could not say which way Rick Tyler had taken
because he was not gone.

'He's in this house right now!' he exclaimed. He ordered a search, and
the guests, a little while ago so friendly, began exploring every nook
and cranny.

'No, no!' cried the old woman shrilly, as they tried the door of the
shed-room, which was bolted and barred. 'Ye can't tech that thar door.
It can't be opened--not ef the Gov'nor o' Tennessee war hyar himself,
a-moanin' an' a-honin' ter git in.'

The sheriff's eyes dilated. 'Open the door--I summon ye!' he proclaimed,
with his imperative official manner.

'No!--I done tole ye,' she said indignantly. 'The word o' the men folks
hev been gin ter keep that thar door shet, an shet it's going ter be
kep'.'

The officer laid his hand upon it.

'Ye mustn't bust it open!' shrilled the old woman. 'Laws-a-massy! ef
thar be many sech ez you-uns in Shaftesville, I ain't s'prised none that
the Bible gits ter mournin' over the low kentry, an' calls it a vale o'
tears an' the valley o' the shadder o' death!'

The sheriff had placed his powerful shoulder against the frail batten
door.

'Hyar goes!' he said.

There was a crash; the door lay in splinters on the floor; the men
rushed precipitately over it.

They came back laughing sheepishly. The officer's face was angry and
scarlet.

'Don't take the bar'l--don't take the bar'l!' the old woman besought of
him, as she fairly hung upon his arm. 'I dunno _how_ the boys would
cavort ef they kem back an' fund the bar'l gone.'

He gave her no heed. 'Whyn't ye tell me that man warn't thar?' he asked
of the girl.

'Ye didn't ax me that word,' said Dorinda.

'No, 'Cajah Green, ye didn't,' said one of the men, who, since the
abortive result of their leader's suspicion, were ashamed of their
mission, and prone to self-exoneration. 'I'll stand up ter it ez she
answered full an' true every word ez ye axed her.'

'Lor'-a'mighty! Ef I jes' knowed aforehand how it will tech the boys
when they view the door down onto the floor!' exclaimed the old woman.
'They mought jounce round hyar ez ef they war bereft o' reason, an' all
thar hope o' salvation hed hung on the hinges. An' then agin they mought
'low ez they hed ruther hev no door than be at the trouble o' shettin'
it an' barrin' it up ez they come an' go. They air mighty onsartin in
thar temper, an' I hev never hankered ter see 'em crost. But fur the
glory's sake, don't tech the bar'l. It's been sot thar ter age some, ef
the Lord will spare it.'

In the girl's lucent eyes the officer detected a gleam of triumph. How
far away in the tangled labyrinths of the mountain wilderness, among the
deer-paths and the cataracts and the cliffs, had these long hours led
Rick Tyler?

He spoke on his angry impulse: 'An' I ain't goin' ter furgit in a hurry
how I hev fund out ez ye air a-consortin' with criminals, an' aidin' an'
abettin' men ez air fleein' from jestice an' wanted fur murder. Ye look
out; ye'll find yerself in Shaftesville jail 'fore long, I'm
a-thinkin'.'

'He stopped an' talked ez other folks stop an' talk,' Dorinda retorted.
'I couldn't hender, an' I hed no mind ter hender. He took no bite nor
sup ez others hez done. 'Pears like ter me ez we hev gin aid an' comfort
ter the off'cer o' the law ez well ez we could.'

And this was the story that went down to Shaftesville.

The man, his wrath rebounding upon himself, hung his head, and went down
to the trough, and mounted his horse without another word.

The others hardly knew what to say to Dorinda. But they were more
deliberate in their departure, and hung around apologizing in their rude
way to the old woman, who convulsively besought each to spare the
barrel, which had been set in the shed-room to 'age some, ef it could be
lef alone.'

Dorinda stood under the jack-bean vines, blossoming purple and white,
and watched the men as they silently rode away. All the pride within her
was stirred. Every sensitive fibre flinched from the officer's coarse
threat. She followed him out of sight with vengeful eyes.

'I wish I war a man!' she cried passionately.

'A-law, D'rindy!' exclaimed her grandmother, aghast at the idea. 'That
ain't manners!'

The shadows were beginning to creep slowly up the slopes of the Great
Smoky Mountains, as if they came from the depths of the earth. A roseate
suffusion idealised range and peak to the east. The delicate skyey
background of opaline tints and lustre made distinct and definite their
majestic symmetry of outline. Ah! and the air was so clear! What
infinite lengths of elastic distances stretched between that quivering
trumpet-flower by the fence and the azure heights which its scarlet horn
might almost seem to cover! The sun, its yellow blaze burned out, and
now a sphere of smouldering fire, was dropping down behind Chilhowee,
royally purple, richly dark. Wings were in the air, and every instinct
was homeward. An eagle, with a shadow skurrying through the valley like
some forlorn Icarus that might not soar, swept high over the landscape.
Above all rose the great 'bald,' still splendidly illumined with the red
glamour of the sunset, and holding its uncovered head so loftily against
the sky that it might seem it had bared its brow before the majesty of
heaven.

When the 'men folks,' great, gaunt, bearded, jeans-clad fellows, stood
in the shed-room and gazed at the splintered door upon the floor, it was
difficult to judge what was the prevailing sentiment, so dawdling, so
uncommunicative, so inexpressive of gesture were they.

'We knowed ez thar war strangers prowlin' roun',' said the master of the
house, when he had heard his mother's excited account of the events of
the day. 'We war a-startin' home ter dinner, an' seen thar beastises
hitched thar a-nigh the trough. An' I 'lowed ez mebbe they mought be the
revenue devils, so I jes' made the boys lay low. An' Sol war set ter
watch, an' he gin the word when they hed rid away.'

He was a man of fifty-five, perhaps, tough and stalwart. His face was as
lined and seamed as that of his mother, who had counted nearly fourscore
years, but his frame was almost as supple as at thirty. This trait of
physical vigour was manifested in each of his muscular sons, and,
despite their slow and lank uncouthness, their movements suggested
latent elasticity. In Dorinda, his only daughter, it graced her youth
and perfected her beauty. He was known far and wide as 'Groundhog
Cayce,' but he would tell you, with a flash of the eye, that before the
war he bore the Christian name of John.

Nothing more was said on the subject until after supper, when they were
all sitting, dusky shadows, on the little porch, where the fireflies
sparkled and the vines fluttered, and one might look out and see the new
moon, in the similitude of a silver boat, sailing down the western
skies, off the headlands of Chilhowee. A cricket was shrilling in the
weeds. The vague sighing voice of the woods rose and fell with a
melancholy monody. A creamy elder-blossom glimmered in a corner of the
rail fence, hard by, its delicate, delicious odour pervading the air.

'I never knowed,' said one of the young men, 'ez this hyar sher'ff--this
'Cajah Green--war sech a headin' critter.'

'He never teched the bar'l,' said the old woman, not wishing that he
should appear blacker than he had painted himself.

'I s'pose you-uns gin him an' his gang a bite an' sup,' remarked
Groundhog Cayce.

'They eat a sizable dinner hyar,' put in Mirandy Jane, who, having
cooked it, had no mind that it should be belittled.

'An' they stayed a right smart while, an' talked powerful frien'ly an'
sociable-like,' said old Mrs. Cayce, 'till the sher'ff got addled with
the notion that we hed Rick Tyler hid hyar. An' unless we-uns hed tied
him in the cheer or shot him, nuthin' in natur' could hev held him. I
'lowed 't war the dram he tuk, though D'rindy thinks differ. They never
teched the bar'l, though.'

'An' then,' said Dorinda, with a sudden gush of tears, all the afflicted
delicacy of a young and tender woman, all the overweening pride of the
mountaineer, throbbing wildly in her veins, her heart afire, her
helpless hands trembling, 'he said the word ez he would lock me up in
the jail at Shaftesville, sence I hed owned ter seein' a man ez he
warn't peart enough ter ketch. He spoke that word ter me--_the jail_!'

She hung sobbing in the doorway.

There was a murmur of indignation among the group, and John Cayce rose
to his feet with a furious oath.

'He shell rue it!' he cried--'he shell rue it! Me an' mine take no word
off'n nobody. My gran'dad an' his three brothers, one hunderd an'
fourteen year ago, kem hyar from the old North State an' settled in the
Big Smoky. They an' thar sons rooted up the wilderness. They cropped.
They fit the beastis; they fit the Injun; they fit the British; an' this
last little war o' ourn they fit each other. Thar hev never been a
coward 'mongst 'em. Thar hev never been a key turned on one of 'em, or a
door shet. They hev respected the law fur what it war wuth, an' they hev
stood up fur thar rights agin it. They answer fur thar word, an others
hev ter answer.'

He paused for a moment.

The moon, still in the similitude of a silver boat, swung at anchor in a
deep indentation in the summit of Chilhowee that looked like some lonely
pine-girt bay; what strange, mysterious fancies did it land from its
cargo of sentiments and superstitions and uncanny influences!

'D'rindy,' her father commanded, 'make a mark on this hyar rifle-bar'l
fur 'Cajah Green's word ter be remembered by.'

There was a flash in the faint moonbeams, as he held out to her a long,
sharp knife. The rifle was in his hand. Other marks were on it
commemorating past events. This was to be a foregone conclusion.

'No, no!' cried the girl, shrinking back aghast. 'I don't want him shot.
I wouldn't hev him hurted fur me, fur nothin'! I ain't keerin' now fur
what he said. Let him be--let him be!'

She had smarted under the sense of indignity. She had wanted their
sympathy, and perhaps their idle anger. She was dismayed by the
revengeful passion she had roused.

'No, no!' she reiterated, as one of the younger men, her brother Peter,
stepped swiftly out from the shadow, seized her hand with the knife
trembling in it, and, catching the moonlight on the barrel of the rifle,
guided upon it, close to the muzzle, the mark of a cross.

The moon had weighed anchor at last, and dropped down behind the
mountain summit, leaving the bay with a melancholy waning suffusion of
light, and the night very dark.




II.


The summer days climbed slowly over the Great Smoky Mountains. Long the
morning lingered among the crags, and chasms, and the dwindling shadows.
The vertical noontide poised motionless on the great balds. The evening
dawdled along the sunset slopes, and the waning crimson waited in the
dusk for the golden moonrise.

So little speed they made that it seemed to Rick Tyler that weeks
multiplied while they loitered.

It might have been deemed the ideal of a sylvan life--those days while
he lay hid out on the Big Smoky. His rifle brought him food with but the
glance of the eye and a touch on the trigger: 'Ekal ter the prophet's
raven, ef the truth war knowed,' he said sometimes, while he cooked the
game over a fire of dead-wood gathered by the wayside. A handful of
blackberries gave it a relish, and there were the ice-cold,
never-failing springs of the range wherever he might turn.

But for the unquiet thoughts that followed him from the world, the
characteristic sloth of the mountaineer might have spared him all sense
of tedium, as he lay on the bank of a mountain stream, while the slow
days waxed and waned. Often he would see a musk-rat--picturesque little
body--swimming in a muddy dip. And again his listless gaze was riveted
upon the quivering diaphanous wings of a snake-doctor, hovering close at
hand, until the grotesque, airy thing would flit away. The arrowy
sunbeams shot into the dense umbrageous tangles, and fell spent to earth
as the shadows swayed. Farther down the stream two huge cliffs rose on
either side of the channel, giving a narrow view of far-away blue
mountains as through a gate. In and out stole the mist, uncertain
whither. The wind came and went, paying no toll. Sometimes, when the sun
was low, a shadow--an antlered shadow--slipped through like a fantasy.

But when the skies would begin to darken and the night come tardily on,
the scanty incidents of the day lost their ephemeral interest. His human
heart would assert itself, and he would yearn for the life from which he
was banished, and writhe with an intolerable anguish under his sense of
injury.

'An' the law holds me the same ez 'Bednego Tynes, who killed Joel Byers,
jes' ter keep his hand in--hevin' killed another man afore--an' I never
so much ez lifted a finger agin him!'

He pondered much on his past, and the future that he had lost. Sometimes
he gave himself to adjusting, from the meagre circumstances of their
common lot on Big Smoky, the future of those with whose lives his own
had heretofore seemed an integral part, and from which it should for
evermore be dissevered. All the pangs of penance were in that sense of
irrevocability. It was done, and here was his choice: to live the life
of a skulking wolf, to prowl, to flee, to fight at bay, or to return and
confront an outraged law. He experienced a frenzy of rage to realize how
hardily his world would roll on without him. Big Smoky would not suffer!
The sun would shine, and the crops ripen, and the harvest come, and the
snows sift down, and the seasons revolve. The boys would shoot for beef,
and there was to be a gander-pulling at the Settlement when the
candidates should come 'stumpin' the Big Smoky' for the midsummer
elections. And when, periodically, 'the mountings' would wake to a sense
of sin, and a revival would be instituted, all the people would meet,
and clap their hands, and sing, and pray, and that busy sinner, D'rindy,
might find time to think upon grace, and perhaps upon the man whom she
likened to the prophets of old.

Then Rick Tyler would start up from his bed of boughs, and stride wildly
about among the boulders, hardly pausing to listen if he heard a wolf
howling on the lonely heights. An owl would hoot derisively from the
tangled laurel. And oh, the melancholy moonlight in the melancholy
pines, where the whip-poor-will moaned and moaned!

'I'd shoot that critter ef I could make out ter see him!' cried the
harassed fugitive, his every nerve quivering.

It all began with Dorinda; it all came back to her. He drearily foresaw
that she would forget him; and yet he could not know how the alienation
was to commence, how it should progress, and the process of its
completion. 'All whilst I'm a-roamin' off with the painters an' sech!'
he exclaimed bitterly.

And she--her future was plain enough. There was a little log-cabin by
the grist-mill: the mountains sheltered it; the valley held it as in the
palm of a hand. Hardly a moment since, his jealous heart had been racked
by the thought of the man she likened to the prophets of old, and now he
saw her spinning in the door of Amos James's house in the quiet depths
of Eskaqua Cove.

This vision stilled his heart. He was numbed by his despair. Somehow,
the burly young miller seemed a fitter choice than the religious
enthusiast, whose leisure was spent in praying in the desert places. He
wondered that he should ever have felt other jealousy, and was
subacutely amazed to find this passion so elastic.

With wild and haggard eyes he saw the day break upon this vision. It
came in at the great gate--a pale flush, a fainting star, a burst of
song, and the red and royal sun.

The morning gradually exerted its revivifying influence and brought a
new impulse. He easily deceived himself, and disguised it as a reason.

'This hyar powder is a-gittin' mighty low,' he said to himself,
examining the contents of his powder-horn. 'An' that thar rifle eats it
up toler'ble fast sence I hev hed ter hunt varmints fur my vittles. Ef
that war the sher'ff a-ridin' arter me the day I war at Cayce's, he's
done gone whar he b'longs by this time--'twar two weeks ago; an' ef he
ain't gone back, he wouldn't be layin' fur me roun' the Settle_mint_,
nohow. An' I kin git some powder thar, an' hear 'em tell what the
mounting air a-doin' of. An' mebbe I won't be so durned lonesome when I
gits back hyar.'

He mounted his horse, later in the day, and picked his way slowly down
the banks of the stream and through the great gate.

The Settlement on a spur of the Big Smoky illustrated the sacrilege of
civilization. A number of trees, girdled years ago, stretched above the
fields their gigantic skeletons, suggesting their former majesty of mien
and splendid proportions. Their forlorn, leafless branches rattled
together with a dreary sound, as the breeze stirred among the gaunt and
pallid assemblage. The little log-cabins, five or six in number, were so
situated among the stumps which disfigured the clearing, that if a
sudden wind should bring down one of the monarchial spectres of the
forest, it would make havoc only in the crops. The wheat was thin and
backward. A little patch of cotton in a mellow dip served to show the
plant at its minimum. There was tobacco, too, placed, like the cotton,
where it was hoped it would take a notion to grow. Sorghum flourished,
and the tasselled Indian corn, waving down a slope, had aboriginal
suggestions of plumed heads and glancing quivers. A clamour of Guinea
fowls arose, and geese and turkeys roved about in the publicity of the
clearing with the confident air of esteemed citizens. Sheep were feeding
among the ledges.

It was hard to say what might be bought at the store except powder and
coffee, and sugar perhaps, if 'long-sweetenin'' might not suffice; for
each of the half-dozen small farms was a type of the region, producing
within its own confines all its necessities. Hand-looms could be
glimpsed through open doors, and as yet the dry-goods trade is unknown
to the homespun-clad denizens of the Settlement. Beeswax, feathers,
honey, dried fruit, are bartered here, and a night's rest has never been
lost for the perplexities of the currency question on the Big Smoky
Mountains.

The proprietor of the store, his operations thus limited, was content to
grow rich slowly, if needs were to grow rich at all. In winter he sat
before the great wood fire in the store and smoked his pipe, and his
crony, the blacksmith, often came, hammer in hand and girded with his
leather apron, and smoked with him. In the summer he sat all day, as
now, in front of the door, looking meditatively at the scene before him.
The sunlight slanted upon the great dead trees; their forms were imposed
with a wonderful distinctness upon the landscape that stretched so far
below the precipice on which the little town was perched. They even
touched, with those bereaved and denuded limbs, the far blue mountains
encircling the horizon, and with their interlacing lines and curves they
seemed some mysterious scripture engraven upon the world.

It was just six o'clock, and the shadow of a bough that still held a
mass of woven sticks, once the nest of an eagle, had reached the verge
of the cliff, when the sound of hoofs fell on the still air, and a man
rode into the clearing from the encompassing woods.

The storekeeper glanced up to greet the new-comer, but did not risk the
fatigue of rising. Women looked out of the windows, and a girl on a
porch, reeling yarn, found a reason to stop her work. A man came out of
a house close by, and sat on the fence, within range of any colloquy in
which he might wish to participate. The whole town could join at will in
a municipal conversation. The forge fire showed a dull red against the
dusky brown shadows in the recesses of the shop. The blacksmith stood in
front of the door, his eyes shielded with his broad blackened right
hand, and looked critically at the steed. Horses were more in his line
than men. He was a tall, powerfully built fellow of thirty, perhaps,
with the sooty aspect peculiar to his calling, a swarthy complexion, and
a remarkably well-knit, compact, and muscular frame. He often said in
pride, 'Ef I hed hed the forgin' o myself, I wouldn't hev welded on a
pound more, or hammered out a leader differ.'

Suddenly detaching his attention from the horse, he called out, 'Waal,
sir! Ef thar ain't Rick Tyler!' This was addressed to the town at large.
Then, 'What ails ye, Rick? I hearn tell ez you-uns war on yer way ter
Shaftesville along o' the sher'ff.' He had a keen and twinkling eye. He
cast it significantly at the man on the fence. 'Ye kem back, I reckon,
ter git yer handcuffs mended at my shop. Gimme the bracelets.' He held
out his hand in affected anxiety.

'I ain't a-wearin' no bracelets now.' Rick Tyler's hasty impulse had
its impressiveness. He levelled his pistol. 'Ef ye hanker ter do enny
mendin', I'll gin ye repairs ter make in them cast-iron chit'lings o'
yourn,' he said coolly.

He was received at the store with a distinct accession of respect. The
blacksmith stood watching him, with angry eyes, and a furtive
recollection of the reward offered by the governor for his apprehension.

The young fellow, with a sudden return of caution, did not at once
venture to dismount; and Nathan Hoodendin, the storekeeper, rose for no
customer. Respectively seated, for these diverse reasons, they
transacted the negotiation.

'Hy're, Rick,' drawled the storekeeper languidly. 'I hopes ye keeps yer
health,' he added politely.

The young man melted at the friendly tone. This was the welcome he had
looked for at the Settlement. Loneliness had made his sensibilities
tender, and 'hiding out' affected his spirits more than dodging the
officers in the haunts of men, or daring the cupidity roused, he knew,
by the reward for his capture. The blacksmith's jeer touched him as
cruelly as an attempt upon his liberty. 'Jes' toler'ble,' he admitted,
with the usual rural reluctance to acknowledge full health. 'I hopes ye
an' yer fambly air thrivin',' he drawled, after a moment.

A whiff came from the storekeeper's pipe; the smoke wreathed before his
face, and floated away.

'Waal, we air makin' out--we air makin' out.'

'I kem over hyar,' said Rick Tyler, proceeding to business, 'ter git
some powder out'n yer store. I wants one pound.'

Nathan Hoodendin smoked silently for a moment. Then, with a facial
convulsion and a physical wrench, he lifted his voice.

'Jer'miah!' he shouted in a wild wheeze. And again, 'Jer'miah!'

The invoked Jer'miah did not materialize at once. When a small
tow-headed boy of ten came from a house among the stumps, with that
peculiar deftness of tread characteristic of the habitually barefoot, he
had an alert, startled expression, as if he had just jumped out of a
bush. His hair stood up in front; he had wide pop-eyes, and long ears,
and a rabbit-like aspect that was not diminished as he scudded round the
heels of Rick Tyler's horse, at which he looked apprehensively.

'Jer'miah,' said his father, with a pathetic cadence, 'go into the
store, bub, an' git Rick Tyler a pound o' powder.'

As Jeremiah started in, the paternal sentiment stirred in Nathan
Hoodendin's breast.

'Jer'miah,' he wheezed, bringing the fore-legs of the chair to the
ground, and craning forward with unwonted alacrity to look into the
dusky interior of the store, 'don't ye be foolin' round that thar powder
with no lighted tallow dip nor nuthin'. I'll whale the life out'n ye ef
ye do. Jes' weigh it by the winder.'

Whether from fear of a whaling by his active parent, or of the
conjunction of a lighted tallow dip and powder, Jeremiah dispensed with
the candle. He brought the commodity out presently, and Rick stowed it
away in his saddle-bags.

'Can't ye 'light an' sot a while 'an talk, Rick?' said the storekeeper.
'We-uns hev done hed our supper, but I reckon they could fix ye a snack
yander ter the house.'

Rick said he wanted nothing to eat, but, although he hesitated, he could
not finally resist the splint-bottomed chair tilted against the wall of
the store, and a sociable pipe, and the countryside gossip.

'What's goin' on 'round the mounting?' he asked.

Gid Fletcher, the blacksmith, came and sat in another chair, and the man
on the fence got off and took up his position on a stump hard by. The
great red sun dropped slowly behind the purple mountains; and the full
golden moon rose above the corn-field that lay on the eastern slope, and
hung there between the dark woods on either hand; and the blades caught
the light, and tossed with burnished flashes into the night; and the
great ghastly trees assumed a ghostly whiteness; and the mystic writing
laid on the landscape below had the aspect of an uninterpreted portent.
The houses were mostly silent; now and then a guard-dog growled at some
occult alarm; a woman somewhere was softly and fitfully singing a child
to sleep, and the baby crooned too, and joined in the vague, drowsy
ditty. And for aught else that could be seen, and for aught else that
could be heard, this was the world.

'Waal, the Tempter air fairly stalkin' abroad on the Big
Smoky--leastwise sence the summer season hev opened,' said Nathan
Hoodendin. His habitual expression of heavy, joyless pondering had been
so graven into his face that his raised grizzled eye-brows, surmounted
by a multitude of perplexed wrinkles, his long, dismayed jaw, his thin,
slightly parted lips, and the deep grooves on either side of his nose,
were not susceptible of many gradations of meaning. His shifting eyes,
cast now at the stark trees, now at the splendid disk of the rising
moon, betokened but little anxiety for the Principle of Evil aloose in
the Big Smoky. 'Fust--lemme see--thar war Eph Lowry, ez got inter a
quar'l with his wife's half-brother's cousin, an' a-tusslin' 'roun' they
cut one another right smart, an' some say ez Eph'll never hev his
eyesight right good no more. Then thar war Baker Teal, what the folks
in Eskaqua Cove 'low let down the bars o' the milk-sick pen, one day
las' fall, an' druv Jacob White's red cow in; an' his folks never knowed
she hed grazed thar till they hed milked an' churned fur butter, when
she lay down an' died o' the milk-sick. Ef they hed drunk her milk
same ez common, 'twould hev sickened 'em, sure, 'an mebbe killed
'em. An' they've been quar'lin' 'bout'n it ever sence. Satan's
a-stirrin'--Satan's a-stirrin' 'roun' the Big Smoky.'

'Waal, I hearn ez some o' them folks in Eskaqua Cove 'low ez the red cow
jes' hooked down the bars, bein' a turrible hooker,' spoke up the man on
the stump unexpectedly.

'Waal, White an' his folks won't hear ter no sech word ez that,' said
the blacksmith; 'an' arter jowin' an' jowin' back an' fo'th they went
t'other day an' informed on Teal 'fore the jestice, an' the Squair fined
him twenty-five dollars, 'cordin' ter the law o' Tennessee fur them ez
m'liciously lets down the bars o' the milk-sick pen. An' Baker Teal hed
ter pay, an' the county treasury an' the informers divided the money
'twixt 'em.'

'What did I tell you-uns? Satan's a-stirrin'--Satan's a-stirrin' 'roun'
the Big Smoky,' said the storekeeper, with a certain morbid pride in the
Enemy's activity.

'The constable o' this hyar deestric',' recommenced Gid Fletcher, who
seemed as well informed as Nathan Hoodendin, 'he advised 'em ter lay it
afore the jestice; he war mighty peart 'bout'n that thar job. They 'low
ter me ez he hev tuk up a crazy fit ez he kin beat Micajah Green fur
sher'ff, an' he's a-skeetin' arter law-breakers same ez a rooster arter
a Juny-bug. He 'lows it'll show the kentry what a peart sher'ff he'd
make.'

'Shucks!' said the man on the stump. 'I'll vote fur 'Cajah Green fur
sher'ff agin the old boy; he hev got a nose fur game.'

'He hain't nosed you-uns out yit, hev he, Rick?' said the blacksmith,
with feigned heartiness and a covert sneer.

'Ho! ho! ho!' laughed Nathan Hoodendin. 'What war I a-tellin' you-uns?
Satan's a-stirrin'--Satan's surely a-stirrin' on the Big Smoky.'

Rick sat silent in the moonlight, smoking his pipe, his brown wool hat
far back, the light full on his yellow head. His face had grown a trifle
less square, and his features were more distinctly defined than of yore;
he did not look ill, but care had drawn a sharp line here and there.

'One sher'ff's same ter you-uns ez another, ain't he, Rick?' said the
man on the stump. 'Any of 'em 'll do ter run from.'

'They tell it ter me,' said the storekeeper, with so sudden a vivacity
that it seemed it must crack his graven wrinkles, 'ez the whole Cayce
gang air a-goin' ter vote agin 'Cajah Green, 'count o' the way he jawed
at old Mis' Cayce an' D'rindy, the day he run you-uns off from thar,
Rick.'

'I ain't hearn tell o' that yit,' drawled Rick desolately, 'bein' hid
out.'

'Waal, he jawed at D'rindy, an' from what I hev hearn D'rindy jawed
back; an' I dunno ez that's s'prisin'--the gal-folks ginerally do.
Leastwise, I know ez he sent word arterward ter D'rindy by his
dep'ty--ez war a-scoutin' 'roun' hyar, arter you-uns, I reckon, Rick--ez
he would be up some day soon ter 'lectioneer, an' he war a-goin' ter
stop ter thar house an' ax her pardin'. An' she sent him word, fur God's
sake ter bide away from thar.'

A long pause ensued; the stars were faint and few; the iterative note of
the katydid vibrated monotonously in the dark woods; dew was falling;
the wind stirred.

'What ailed D'rindy ter say that word?' asked Rick, mystified.

'Waal, I dunno,' said Hoodendin indifferently. 'I hev never addled my
brains tryin' ter make out what a woman means. Though,' he qualified, 'I
did ax the dep'ty an' Amos Jeemes from down yander in Eskaqua Cove--the
dep'ty hed purtended ter hev summonsed him ez a posse, an' they war
jes' rollickin' 'roun' the kentry like two chickens with thar heads
off--I axed 'em what D'rindy meant; an' they 'lowed they didn't know,
nor war they takin' it ter heart. They 'lowed ez she never axed _them_
ter bide away from thar fur God's sake. An' then they snickered an'
laffed, like single men do. An' I up an' tole 'em ez the Book sot it
down ez the laffter o' fools is like the cracklin' o' bresh under a
pot.'

Rick Tyler was eager, his eyes kindling, his breath quick. He looked
with uncharacteristic alertness at the inexpressive face of the
leisurely narrator.

'They capered like a dunno-what-all on the Big Smoky, them two,--the
off'cer o' the law an' his posse! Thar goin's on war jes' scandalous:
they played kyerds, an' they consorted with the moonshiners over
yander,' nodding his head at the wilderness, 'an' got ez drunk ez two
fraish biled ow_els_: an' they sung an' they hollered. An' they went ter
the meetin'-house over yander whilst they war in liquor, an' the
preacher riz up an' put 'em out. He's toler'ble tough, that thar Pa'son
Kelsey, an' kin hold right smart show in a fight. An' the dep'ty, he
straightened hisself, an' 'lowed he war a off'cer o' the law. An' Pa'son
Kelsey, he 'lowed _he_ war a off'cer o' the law, an' he 'lowed ez his
law war higher 'n the law o' Tennessee. An' with that he barred up the
door. They hed a cornsider'ble disturba_mint_ at the meetin'-house
yander at the Notch, an' the saints war tried in thar temper.'

'The dep'ty 'lows ez Pa'son Kelsey air crazy in his mind,' said the man
on the stump. 'The dep'ty said the pa'son talked ter him like ez ef he
war a onregenerate critter. An' he 'lowed he war baptized in Scolacutta
River two year ago an' better. The dep'ty say these hyar mounting
preachers hain't got no doctrine like the valley folks. He called Pa'son
Kelsey a ignorant cuss!'

'Laws-a-massy!' exclaimed Nathan Hoodendin, scandalized.

'He say it fairly makes him laff ter hear Pa'son Kelsey performing like
he hed a cut-throat mortgage on a seat 'mongst the angels. He say ez he
thinks Pa'son Kelsey speaks with more insurance 'n enny man he ever
see.'

'I reckon, ef the truth war knowed, the dep'ty ain't got no religion,
an' never war in Scolacutta River, 'thout it war a-fishing',' said the
blacksmith, meditatively.

The fugitive from justice, pining for the simple society of his world,
listened like a starveling thing to these meagre details, so replete
with interest to him, so full of life and spirit. The next moment he was
sorry he had come.

'That thar Amos Jeemes air a comical critter,' said the man on the
stump, after an interval of cogitation, and with a gurgling reminiscent
laugh. 'He war a-cuttin' up his shines over thar ter Cayce's, t'other
day; he warn't drunk _then_, ye onderstan'----'

'I onderstan'. He war jes' fool, like he always air,' said the
blacksmith.

'Edzactly,' assented the man on the stump. 'An' he fairly made D'rindy
laff ter see what the critter would say nex'. An' D'rindy always seemed
ter me a powerful solemn sorter gal. Waal, she laffed at Amos. An'
whilst him an' the dep'ty war a-goin' down the mounting--I went down ter
Jeemes's mill ter leave some grist over night ter be ground--the dep'ty,
he run Amos 'bout'n it. The dep'ty he 'lowed ez no gal hed ever made so
much fun o' him, an' Amos 'lowed ez D'rindy _didn't_ make game o' him.
She thunk too much o' him fur that. An' that bold-faced dep'ty, he
'lowed he thought 'twar _him_ ez hed fund favior. An' Amos--we war
mighty nigh down in Eskaqua Cove then--he turned suddint an' p'inted up
the mounting. "What kin you-uns view on the mounting?" he axed. The
dep'ty, he stopped an' stared; an' thar mighty nigh ez high ez the lower
e-end o' the bald, war a light. "That shines fur me ter see whilst I'm
'bleeged ter be in Eskaqua Cove," sez Amos. An' the dep'ty said, "I
think it air a star!" An' Amos sez, sez he, "Bless yer bones, I think
so, too--sometimes!" But 'twarn't no star. 'Twar jes' a light in the
roof-room window o' Cayce's house; an' ye could see it, sure enough,
plumb to the mill in Eskaqua Cove!'

Rick rose to go. Why should he linger, and wring his heart, and garner
bitterness to feed upon in his lonely days? Why should he look upon the
outer darkness of his life, and dream of the star that shone so far for
another man's sake into the sheltered depths of Eskaqua Cove? He had an
impulse which he scorned, for his sight was blurred as he laid his hand
on the pommel of his saddle. He did not see that one of the other men
rose too.

An approach, stealthy, swift, and the sinewy blacksmith flung himself
upon his prisoner with the supple ferocity of a panther.

'Naw--naw!' he said, showing his strong teeth, closely set. 'We can't
part with ye yit, Rick Tyler! I'll arrest you-uns, ef the sher'ff can't.
The peace o' Big Smoky an' the law o' the land air ez dear ter me ez ter
enny other man.'

The young fellow made a frantic effort to mount; then, as his horse
sprang snorting away, he strove to draw one of his pistols. There was a
turbulent struggle under the great silver moon and the dead trees. Again
and again the swaying figures and their interlocked shadows reeled to
the verge of the cliff; one striving to fall and carry the other with
him, the other straining every nerve to hold back his captive.

Even the storekeeper stood up and wheezed out a remonstrance.

'Look-a-hyar, boys'--he began; then, 'Jer'miah,' he broke off abruptly,
as the hopeful scion peered shyly out of the store door, 'clar out'n the
way, sonny; they hev got shootin'-irons, an' some o' em mought go off.'

He himself stepped prudently back. The man on the stump, however, forgot
danger in his excitement. He sat and watched the scene with an eager
relish which might suggest that a love of bull-fights is not a
cultivated taste.

'Be them men a-wraistlin'?' called out a woman, appearing in the doorway
of a neighbouring house.

''Pears like it ter me,' he said dryly.

The strength of despair had served to make the younger man the
blacksmith's equal, and the contest might have terminated differently
had Rick Tyler not stumbled on a ledge. He was forced to his knees, then
full upon the ground, his antagonist's grasp upon his throat. The
blacksmith roared out for help; the man on the stump slowly responded,
and the storekeeper languidly came and overlooked the operation, as the
young fellow was disarmed and securely bound, hand and foot.

'Waal, now, Gid Fletcher, ye hev got him,' said Nathan Hoodendin. 'What
d'ye want with him?'

The blacksmith had risen, panting, with wild eyes, his veins standing
out in thick cords, perspiring from every pore, and in a bounding fury.

'What do I want with him? I want ter put his head on my anvil thar, an'
beat the foolishness out'n it with my hammer. I want ter kick him off'n
this hyar bluff down ter the forge fires o' hell. That air what _I_
want. An' the State o' Tennessee ain't wantin' much differ.'

'Gid Fletcher,' said the man who had been sitting on the stump--he spoke
in an accusing voice--'ye ain't keerin' nuthin' fur the law o' the land,
nor the peace o' Big Smoky, nuther. It air jes' that two hundred dollars
blood-money ye air cottonin' ter, an' ye knows it.'

The love of money, the root of evil, is so rare in the mountains that
the blacksmith stood as before a deep reproof. Then, with a moral
hardihood that matched his physical prowess, he asked, 'An' what ef I
be?'

'What war I a-tellin' you-uns? Satan's a-stirrin'--Satan's a-stirrin' on
the Big Smoky!' interpolated old Hoodendin.

'Waal, I'd never hev been hankerin' fur sech,' drawled the moralist.

A number of other men had come out from the houses, and a discussion
ensued as to the best plan to keep the prisoner until morning. It was
suggested that the time-honoured expedient in localities without the
civilization of a jail--a wagon-body inverted, with a rock upon
it--would be as secure as the state prison.

'But who wants ter go ter heftin' rocks?' asked Nathan Hoodendin
pertinently.

For the sake of convenience, therefore, they left the prisoner bound
with a rope made fast around a stump, that he might not, in his
desperation, roll himself from the crag, and deputing a number of the
men to watch him by turns, the Settlement retired to its slumbers.

The night wore on; the moon journeyed toward the mountains in the west;
the mists rose to meet it, and glistened like a silver sea. Some lonely,
undiscovered ocean, this; never a sail set, never a pennant flying; all
the valley was submerged; the black summits in the distance were
isolated and insular; the moonlight glanced on the sparkling ripples, on
the long reaches of illusive vapour.

At intervals cocks crew; a faint response, like farthest echoes, came
from some neighbouring cove; and then silence, save for the drone of the
nocturnal insects and the far blast of a hunter's horn.

'Jer'miah,' said Rick Tyler suddenly, as the boy crouched by one of the
stumps and watched him with dilated, moonlit eyes--when Nathan
Hoodendin's vigil came the little factotum served in his
stead--'Jer'miah, git my knife out'n the store an' cut these hyar ropes.
I'll gin ye my rifle ef ye will.'

The boy sprang up, scudded off swiftly, then came back, and crouched by
the stump again.

The moon slipped lower and lower; the silver sea had turned to molten
gold; the stars that had journeyed westward with the moon were dying out
of a dim blue sky. Over the corn-field in the east was one larger than
the rest, burning in an amber haze, charged with an unspoken poetical
emotion that set its heart of white fire aquiver.

'I'll gin ye my horse ef ye will.'

'I dassent,' said Jer'miah.

The morning star was burned out at last, and the prosaic day came over
the corn-field.




III.


Twilight was slipping down on the Big Smoky. Definiteness was
annihilated, and distance a suggestion. Mountain forms lay darkening
along the horizon, still flushed with the sunset. Eskaqua Cove had
abysmal suggestions, and the ravines were vague glooms. Fire-flies were
a-flicker in the woods. There might be a star, outpost of the night.

Dorinda, hunting for the vagrant 'crumply cow,' paused sometimes when
the wandering path led to the mountain's brink, and looked down those
gigantic slopes and unmeasured depths. She carried her milk-piggin, and
her head was uncovered. Now and then she called with long, vague vowels,
'Soo--cow! Soo!' There was no response save the echoes, and the vibrant
iteration of the katydid. Once she heard an alien sound, and she paused
to listen. From the projecting spur where she stood, looking across the
Cove, she could see, above the forests on the slopes, the bare, uprising
dome, towering in stupendous proportions against the sky. The sound came
again and yet again, and she recognised the voice of the man who was
wont to go and pray in the desert places on the 'bald' of the mountain,
and whom she had likened to the prophets of old. There was something
indescribably wild and weird in those appealing, tempestuous tones, now
rising as in frenzy, and now falling as with exhaustion--beseeching,
adjuring, reproaching.

'He hev fairly beset the throne o' grace!' she said, with a sort of pity
for this insistent piety. A shivering, filmy mist was slipping down over
the great dome. It glittered in the last rays of the sunlight, already
vanished from the world below, like an illuminated silver gauze. She was
reminded of the veil of the temple, and she had a sense of intrusion.

'Prayer, though, air free for all,' she remarked, as self-justification,
since she had paused to hear.

She did not linger. His voice died in the distance, and the solemnity of
the impression was gradually obliterated. As she went she presently
began to sing, sometimes interpolating, without a sense of interruption,
her mellow call of 'Soo--cow! Soo!' until it took the resemblance of a
refrain, with an abrupt crescendo. The wild roses were flowering along
the paths, and the pink and white azaleas--what perfumed ways, what
lavish grace and beauty! The blooms of the laurel in the darkling places
were like a spangling of stars. Dew was falling--it dashed into her
face from the boughs that interlaced across the unfrequented path--and
still the light lingered, loath to leave. She heard the stir of some
wild things in the hollow of a great tree, and then a faint, low growl.
She fancied she saw a pair of bright eyes looking apprehensively at her.

'We-uns hev got a baby at our house, too, an' we don't want yourn,
ma'am; much obleeged, all the same,' she said, with a laugh. But she
looked back with a sort of pity for that alert maternal fear, and she
never mentioned to the youngest brother, a persistent trapper, the
little family of raccoons in the woods.

She had forgotten the voice raised in importunate supplication on the
'bald,' until, pursuing the path, she was led into the road, hard by a
little bridge, or more properly culvert, which had rotted long ago; the
vines came up through the cavities in the timbers, and a blackberry
bush, with a wren's nest, flourished in their midst. The road was fain
to wade through the stream; but the channel was dry now--a narrow belt
of yellow sand lying in a long curving vista in the midst of the dense
woods. A yoke of oxen, drawing a rude slide, paused to rest in the
middle of the channel, and beside them was a man, of medium height,
slender but sinewy, dressed in brown jeans, his trousers thrust into the
legs of his boots, a rifle on his shoulder, and a broad-brimmed old wool
hat surmounting his dark hair, that hung down to the collar of his coat.
Her singing had prepared him for her advent, but he barely raised his
eyes. That quick glance was incongruous with his dullard aspect; it held
a spark of fire, inspiration, frenzy--who can say?

He spoke suddenly, in a meek, drawling way, and with the air of
submitting the proposition:

'I hev gin the beastises a toler'ble hard day's work, an' I'm
a-favourin' 'em goin' home.'

A long pause ensued. The oxen hung down their weary heads, with the
symbol of slavery upon them. The smell of ferns and damp mould was on
the air. Rotting logs lay here and there, where the failing water had
stranded them. The grape-vine, draping the giant oaks, swayed gently,
and suggested an observation to break the silence.

'How air the moral vineyard a-thrivin'?' she asked solemnly.

He looked downcast. 'Toler'ble, I reckon.'

'I hearn tell ez thar war a right smart passel o' folks baptized over
yander in Scolacutta River,' she remarked encouragingly.

'I baptized fourteen.'

She turned the warm brightness of her eyes upon him. 'They hed all fund
grace!' she exclaimed.

'They 'lowed so. I hopes they'll prove it by thar works,' he said,
without enthusiasm.

'Ye war a-prayin' fur 'em on the bald?' she asked, apprehending that he
accounted these converts peculiarly precarious.

'Naw,' he replied, with moody sincerity; 'I war a-prayin' fur myself.'

There was another pause, longer and more awkward than before.

'What work be you-uns a-doin' of?' asked Dorinda timidly. She quailed a
trifle before the uncomprehended light in his eyes. It was not of her
world, she felt instinctively.

'I hev ploughed some, holpin' Jonas Trice, an' hev been a-hauling wood.
I tuk my rifle along,' he added, 'thinkin' I mought see suthin' ez would
be tasty fur the old men's supper ez I kem home, but I forgot ter look
around keen.'

There was a sudden sound along the road--a sound of quick hoof-beats.
Because of the deep sand the rider was close at hand before his approach
was discovered. He drew rein abruptly, and they saw that it was Gid
Fletcher, the blacksmith of the Settlement.

'Hev you-uns hearn the news?' he cried excitedly, as he threw himself
from the saddle.

The man, leaning on the rifle, looked up, with no question in his eyes.
There was an almost monastic indifference to the world suggested in his
manner.

'Thar's a mighty disturbamint at the Settle_mint_. Las' night this hyar
Rick Tyler--what air under indictment fur a-killin' o' Joel Byers--he
kem a-nosin' 'roun' the Settle_mint_ a-tryin' ter buy powder----'

Dorinda stretched out her hand; the trees were unsteady before her; the
few faint stars, no longer pulsating points of light, described a circle
of dazzling gleams. She caught at the yoke on the neck of the oxen; she
leaned upon the impassive beast, and then it seemed that every faculty
was merged in the sense of hearing. The horse had moved away from the
blacksmith, holding his head down among the boulders, and snuffing about
for the water he remembered here with a disappointment almost pathetic.

'War he tuk?' demanded the preacher.

'Percisely so,' drawled the blacksmith, with a sub-current of elation in
his tone.

There was a sudden change in Kelsey's manner. He turned fiery eyes upon
the blacksmith. Light and life were in every line of his face. He drew
himself up tense and erect; he stretched forth his hand with an accusing
gesture.

''Twar you-uns, Gid Fletcher, ez tuk the boy!'

'Lord, pa'son, how'd you-uns know that?' exclaimed the blacksmith. His
manner combined a difference, which in civilization we recognise as
respect for the cloth, with the easy familiarity, induced by the
association since boyhood, of equals in age and station. 'I hedn't let
on a word, hed I, D'rindy?'

The idea of an abnormal foreknowledge, mysteriously possessed, had its
uncanny influences. The lonely woods were darkening about them. The
